---
title: "New features in C++17 for LHCb Physists"
teaching: 20
exercises: 0
questions:
- "What can I use from the improvements C++ in 2017?"
objectives:
- "Learn a few of the most useful tools in C++17."
keypoints:
- "Learn about C++17"
---

# C++17

The every-three-year cycle has changed the development of C++; we are now getting consistent releases somewhere in-between the major and minor releases of old. The 2017 release may be called minor by some, with a huge portion of the planned improvements being pushed back another 3-6 years, but there were several substantial changes in areas that particle physicists can use.

## Parallel standard library algorithms

You can now set an execution policy on algorithms in the standard library; sequential, parallel, and vector are allowed. It is integrated into the algorithms library; you just add the execution policy as the first argument to the algorithm. For example:

```cpp
std::vector<double> vals = {1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0};
auto my_square = [](double value){return value*value;}
std::for_each(std::parallel::par_vec, vals.begin(), vals.end(), my_square);
```

> Remember, if you are already in a multithreaded application, you may not get much benefit from multithreading further.

## Filesystem

The powerful Boost file system has finally made it into the standard library, after three revisions and promises every three years. This allows object oriented syntax for file manipulation, and works on Windows/Mac/Linux. However, it probably will not be integrated into libraries very quickly, requiring casting to c-style strings to be used. Should still be very useful. If you are familiar with Python's pathlib or a similar library, this will seem familiar.

A simple example of the new filesystem:
```cpp
auto file_in_path = std::filesystem::current_path() / "file.txt";
file_in_path.replace_extension(".log");
if(std::filesystem::exists(file_in_path))
    ...
```

Here we see that the `/` operator joins path segments, the paths have useful member functions, and the non-member functions can operate on the underlying filesystem. There exists a [full set of filesystem operations](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/filesystem). Generally, any documentation you find for `Boost::filesystem` Version 3 should also be applicable.

## Syntax improvements

Templated constructors (finally!) support template deduction, allowing them to behave like functions. This makes the old function wrappers, like `make_tuple` and `make_shared` obsolete. This makes many templated classes much easier to use for the average user.

Tuple syntax is now part of the language, rather than just part of the library. Combined with the previous improvement to constructors, this allows the following to be written in Python-like syntax:

```cpp
// C++11 syntax
std::tuple<double,int> return_two_args() {
    return make_tuple(1.0, 2);
}
double a, int b;
std::tie(a,b) = return_two_args();
```

```cpp
// C++17 syntax
auto return_two_args() {
    return std::tuple(1.0, 2);
}
auto [a, b] = return_two_args();
```

Along with the C++14 auto return type deduction, C++17 allows the tuple to be created directly without a wrapper function or template parameters, and it allows the variables to be created and assigned directly in the assignment statement. This also works for std::arrays and some structs, and can be overloaded for custom classes. You can also do this (or any one line initializer) inside an if statement, and it will be valid until the end of the else clause. A couple of functions have been added to make using tuples as arguments easier; `std::apply` for functions and `std::make_from_tuple` for classes.

There are a few smaller additions to the standard library too, like the addition of special math functions [things like Bessel functions](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/numeric/special_math). The removal of using raw pointers and unsafe C syntax continues, with std::optional for something that might not exist, and std::variant for a safe union replacement. And `std::any` should help kill the desire to use void pointers. If you have ever needed to clamp a value between two
limits, `std::clamp(min, value, max)` makes the syntax nicer.

The slow removal of the secondary preprocessor language continues with a static constexpr if statement.
Lambda's are now allowed in constexpr functions.  And while we are on the subject of lambda's, they also gained the ability to capture the pointer to the current class by value, with `[*this]`.

The language is now better defined. The order of expression evaluation is no longer left up to the compiler, reducing subtle portability bugs.
The compiler is now guarantied to avoid a copy (copy elision) in many cases; you should already be assuming copy elision in C++11/14 since the compilers have had the option to do it since C++11.
Inline variables are finally allowed, removing the compiler errors that required irritating workarounds and separate `.cpp` files when all you needed was a header file. You still are not supposed to have global variables, but you do so now they are easier to write correctly.

There are other changes that are either too small to discuss here, or are not likely to affect the average particle physicist. Like C++14, many of them polish the newer portions of the language. A very good overview can be found on [StackOverflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/38060436/what-are-the-new-features-in-c17) while the standard is being finalized. Also see Herb Sutter's [site](https://herbsutter.com/category/c/) for reports on the progress made at the C++ standards
meetings.

